Polyunsaturated aldehydes (PUAs), produced as secondary metabolites by diatoms, have been shown to induce toxic effects on a variety of organisms, including copepods and phytoand bacterioplankton.
However, the nature of and the players in this interaction remain poorly understood.
We tested the effect of 3 PUAs commonly produced by marine diatoms-2E,4E/Z-heptadienal (HEPTA), 2E,4E/Z-octadienal (OCTA), 2E,4E/Z-decadienal (DECA) and a mix of HEPTA and OCTA (MIX)-on a natural bacterial community from a coastal area of the NW Mediterranean Sea (Blanes Bay, Spain).
Little effect on total or relative cell abundance or bulk bacterial production was observed after 6 or 24 h exposure to 7.5 nM of the 3 different PUAs for the different bacterial phylogenetic groups (Gammaproteobacteria, Bacteroidetes, Rhodobacteraceae and SAR11), assessed by catalysed reporter deposition (CARD)-fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH).
Metabolic activity, i.e. singlecell activity as determined by microautoradiography combined with CARD-FISH (MAR-CARDFISH), was least affected by the addition of single PUAs in Gammaproteobacteria, markedly in Bacteroidetes and most markedly in Rhodobacteraceae, leading to a decrease in Rhodobacteraceae abundance by 21% (by 38% of the active cells assessed by leucine uptake) compared to the control.
Bacteroidetes, although markedly affected in single-cell activity, were the most abundant group (54% of total cell counts).
The addition of a mixture of OCTA and HEPTA produced a more pronounced decrease in the metabolic activity of all groups than the incubation with the single PUAs, suggesting a synergistic effect.
Our results demonstrate that PUAs have a differential effect on the single-cell activity of distinct bacterial groups in natural communities.
PUAs may therefore play an important role in shaping bacterial community composition by conferring a competitive advantage to PUA-resistant groups, allowing them to preferentially use the organic matter released by diatoms.
Inter-Research 2011.
