Australasian Coasts and Ports 2019 Conference.
All rights reserved.Flooding in coastal areas may be dependent on the coincidence of oceanic water conditions and catchment rain events.
In many locations, the same meteorological systems can cause both catchment rainfall and elevated coastal water levels, so both must be considered when estimating flooding.
Water levels in coastal regions are dynamic and change on a variety of different temporal scales, most notably due to the presence of tides and wave setup.
Understanding and modelling the dynamic nature of coastal tailwater levels during storm events is fundamental to estimating flood drainage in complex environments which require detailed flood management.
Previous flood modelling practice usually considered a fixed ocean tailwater level, sometimes neglecting wave setup, and sometimes allowing the full quantum of wave setup that would be expected on a dissipative beach.
This paper provides a simple methodology for developing a time series of dynamic coastal tailwater levels for a range of different coastal environments, with proper consideration of time-varying wave setup throughout a synthetic design storm.
In addition to wave setup, it considers a variety of coastal processes, including astronomical tides, tidal anomalies, local wind setup and future projections of sea level rise.
This methodology has been used at numerous sites across Australia, including several sites in south-east Tasmania and NSW.
Differing geography and morphology can result in different considerations for coastal tailwater conditions.
In some cases, the region may be swell dominated with negligible wind setup, while more protected areas may warrant the consideration of local wind setup and the impact of wind waves.
By way of a case study, this paper provides a methodology for modelling dynamic coastal tailwater time series in an open coast environment.
The time series developed using this methodology can be used as the ocean boundary condition for a catchment flood study.
